Add 'Debugging layout shifts' post (#4870)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/fast/debugging-layout-shifts/index.md

---
layout: post
title: Debugging layout shifts
subhead: |
  Learn how to identify and fix layout shifts.
authors:
  - katiehempenius
date: 2021-03-11
hero: image/j2RDdG43oidUy6AL6LovThjeX9c2/N65l8ccOUEDESpnnEkje.png
alt: Picture of a layout shift.
description: |
  Learn how to identify and fix layout shifts.
tags:
  - blog

>   - performance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - performance
  - web-vitals
```

*   Was a DOM element inserted or removed before the shifted element?
*   Was the position of the shifted element explicitly changed?

If the preceding element did not cause the layout shift, continue your search by
considering other preceding and nearby elements.

In addition, the direction and distance of a layout shift can provide hints
about root cause. For example, a large downward shift often indicates the
insertion of a DOM element, whereas a 1&nbsp;px or 2&nbsp;px layout shift often indicates
the application of conflicting CSS styles or the loading and application of a
web font.

<figure class="w-figure">
  {% Img
    src="image/j2RDdG43oidUy6AL6LovThjeX9c2/g0892nhvz3SnSaasaO1b.png",
    alt="Diagram showing a layout shift caused by a font swap",
    width="800",
    height="452"
  %}
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    In this example, font swapping caused page elements to shift upwards by five pixels.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

These are some of the specific behaviors that most frequently cause layout shift
events:

#### Changes to the position of an element (that aren't due to the movement of another element)…

Are often the result of:

> *   Stylesheets that are loaded late or overwrite previously declared styles
> *   Animation and transition effects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   Stylesheets that are loaded late or overwrite previously declared styles.
*   Animation and transition effects.
```

> #### Changes to the dimensions of an element…
> 
> Are often the result of:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Changes to the dimensions of an element

This type of change is often a result of:
```

> *   Stylesheets that are loaded late or overwrite previously declared styles
> *   Images and iframes without `width` and `height` attributes that load after
>     their "slot" has been rendered
> *   Text blocks without `width` or `height` attributes that swap fonts after the
>     text has been rendered
> 
> #### The insertion or removal of DOM elements…
> 
> Is often the result of:
> *   Insertion of ads and other third-party embeds
> *   Insertion of banners, alerts, and modals
> *   Infinite scroll and other UX patterns that load additional content above
>     existing content

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   Stylesheets that are loaded late or overwrite previously declared styles.
*   Images and iframes without `width` and `height` attributes that load after
    their "slot" has been rendered.
*   Text blocks without `width` or `height` attributes that swap fonts after the
    text has been rendered.

#### The insertion or removal of DOM elements

This is often the result of:
*   Insertion of ads and other third-party embeds.
*   Insertion of banners, alerts, and modals.
*   Infinite scroll and other UX patterns that load additional content above
    existing content.
```

#### Animations that trigger layout

Some animation effects can [trigger
layout](https://gist.github.com/paulirish/5d52fb081b3570c81e3a). A common
example of this is when DOM elements are 'animated' by incrementing properties
like `top` or `left` rather than using CSS's
[`transform`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform)

> property. This [article](https://web.dev/animations-guide/) has more information
> on creating performant CSS animations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
property. Read [How to create high-performance CSS animations](https://web.dev/animations-guide/)
for more information.
```

### Reproducing layout shifts

You can't fix layout shifts that you can't reproduce. One of the simplest, yet
most effective things you can do to get a better sense of your site's layout
stability is take 5-10 minutes to interact with your site with the goal
triggering layout shifts. Keep the console open while doing this and use the
Layout Instability API to report on layout shifts.

For hard to locate layout shifts, consider repeating this exercise with
different devices and connection speeds. In particular, using a slower
connection speed can make it easier to identify layout shifts. In addition,
you can use a `debugger` statement to make it easier to step through layout
shifts.

```javascript/4
new PerformanceObserver((entryList) => {
  for (const entry of entryList.getEntries()) {
    if (!entry.hadRecentInput) {
      cls += entry.value;
      debugger;
      console.log('Current CLS value:', cls, entry);
    }
  }
}).observe({type: 'layout-shift', buffered: true});
```

Lastly, for layout issues that aren't reproducible in development, consider
using the Layout Instability API in conjunction with your front-end logging tool

> of choice to collect more information on these issues. For example, this
> [code](https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/web-vitals-report/blob/71b0879334798c732f460945ded5267cab5a36bf/src/js/analytics.js#L104-L118)
> shows how to track the largest shifted element on a page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of choice to collect more information on these issues. Check out
the example [code for how to track the largest shifted element on a page](https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/web-vitals-report/blob/71b0879334798c732f460945ded5267cab5a36bf/src/js/analytics.js#L104-L118).
```

---
layout: post
title: Debugging layout shifts
authors:
  - katiehempenius
date: 2021-03-11
hero: image/j2RDdG43oidUy6AL6LovThjeX9c2/N65l8ccOUEDESpnnEkje.png
alt: Picture of a layout shift.
description: |

>   Learn how to identify and fix layout shifts.

Reviewer: Not sure why, but this description is not showing up on the blog page https://deploy-preview-4870--web-dev-staging.netlify.app/blog/

tags:
  - blog
  - performance
---

> The first part of this article discusses tooling for debugging layout shifts;
> the second part of this article discusses the thought process to use when
> identifying the cause of a layout shift.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first part of this article discusses tooling for debugging layout shifts,
while the second part discusses the thought process to use when
identifying the cause of a layout shift.
```

## Tooling

### Layout Instability API

The [Layout Instability API](https://wicg.github.io/layout-instability/) is the
browser mechanism for measuring and reporting layout shifts. All tools for
debugging layout shifts, including DevTools, are ultimately built upon the
Layout Instability API. However, using the Layout Instability API directly is a
powerful debugging tool due to its flexibility.

{% Aside %}
The Layout Instability API is only
[supported](https://caniuse.com/mdn-api_layoutshift) by Chromium browsers. At
the current time there is no way to measure or debug layout shifts in
non-Chromium browsers.
{% endAside %}

#### Usage

> The same code [snippet](https://web.dev/cls/#measure-cls-in-javascript) that is
> used to measure [cumulative layout shift (CLS)](https://web.dev/cls/) can also
> be used to debug layout shifts. The snippet below logs information about layout
> shifts to the console. Inspecting this information will provide you information
> about when, where, and how a layout shift occurred.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same code [snippet](https://web.dev/cls/#measure-cls-in-javascript) that
measures [Cumulative Layout Shift (CLS)](https://web.dev/cls/) can also
serve to debug layout shifts. The snippet below logs information about layout
shifts to the console. Inspecting this log will provide you information
about when, where, and how a layout shift occurred.
```

```javascript
let cls = 0;
new PerformanceObserver((entryList) => {
  for (const entry of entryList.getEntries()) {
    if (!entry.hadRecentInput) {
      cls += entry.value;
      console.log('Current CLS value:', cls, entry);
    }
  }
}).observe({type: 'layout-shift', buffered: true});
```

When running this script be aware that:

> *   The `buffered: true` option indicates that the
>     [PerformanceObserver](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/PerformanceObserver)
>     should check the browser's [performance entry
>     buffer](https://www.w3.org/TR/performance-timeline-2/#dfn-performance-entry-buffer)
>     for performance entries that were created before the observer's
>     initialization. As a result, the PerformanceObserver will report layout
>     shifts that happened both before and after it was initialized. Keep this in
>     mind when inspecting the console logs. An initial glut of layout shifts can
>     reflect a reporting backlog, rather than the sudden occurrence of numerous
>     layout shifts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   The `buffered: true` option indicates that the
    [`PerformanceObserver`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/PerformanceObserver)
    should check the browser's [performance entry
    buffer](https://www.w3.org/TR/performance-timeline-2/#dfn-performance-entry-buffer)
    for performance entries that were created before the observer's
    initialization. As a result, the `PerformanceObserver` will report layout
    shifts that happened both before and after it was initialized. Keep this in
    mind when inspecting the console logs. An initial glut of layout shifts can
    reflect a reporting backlog, rather than the sudden occurrence of numerous
    layout shifts.
```

> *   To avoid impacting performance, the PerformanceObserver waits until the main
>     thread is idle to report on layout shifts. As a result, depending on how
>     busy the main thread is, there may be a slight delay between when a layout
>     shift occurs and when it is logged in the console.
> *   This script ignores layout shifts that occurred within 500ms of user input
>     and therefore do not count towards CLS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   To avoid impacting performance, the `PerformanceObserver` waits until the main
    thread is idle to report on layout shifts. As a result, depending on how
    busy the main thread is, there may be a slight delay between when a layout
    shift occurs and when it is logged in the console.
*   This script ignores layout shifts that occurred within 500&nbsp;ms of user input
    and therefore do not count towards CLS.
```

    shift are reported. This information is reported using the LayoutShift
    Attribution interface (explained in more detail below).
*   `value`: The `value` property reports the [layout shift
    score](https://web.dev/cls/#layout-shift-score) for a particular layout
    shift.
*   `hadRecentInput`: The `hadRecentInput` property indicates whether a layout
    shift occurred within 500 milliseconds of user input.
*   `startTime`: The `startTime` property indicates when a layout shift
    occurred. `startTime` is indicated in milliseconds and is measured relative
    to the [time that the page load was
    initiated](https://www.w3.org/TR/hr-time-2/#sec-time-origin).
*   `duration`: The `duration` property will always be set to `0`. This property
    is inherited from the
    [`PerformanceEntry`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/PerformanceEntry)
    interface (the `LayoutShift` interface extends the `PerformanceEntry`
    interface). However, the concept of duration does not apply to layout shift
    events, so it is set to `0`. For information on the `PerformanceEntry`
    interface, refer to the

>     [spec](https://w3c.github.io/performance-timeline/#the-performanceentry-interface).

Reviewer: I think this might be easier to parse as a table (with two columns, property and description).

        "left": 311
      }
    }
  ]
```

The `node` property identifies the HTML element that shifted. Hovering on this
property in DevTools highlights the corresponding page element.

The `previousRect` and `currentRect` properties report the size and position of
the node. 

*   The `x` and `y` coordinates report the x-coordinate and y-coordinate
    respectively of the top-left corner of the element
*   The `width` and `height` properties report the width and height respectively
    of the element.
*   The `top`, `right`, `bottom`, and `left` properties report the x or y
    coordinate values corresponding to the given edge of the element. In other
    words, the value of `top` is equal to `y`; the value of `bottom` is equal to
    `y+height`.

If all properties of `previousRect` are set to 0 this means that the element has
shifted into view. If all properties of `currentRect` are set to 0 this means
that the element has shifted out of view.

One of the most important things to understand when interpreting these outputs
is that elements listed as _sources_ are the elements that shifted during the
layout shift. However, it's possible that these elements are only indirectly

> related to the 'root cause' of layout instability. For example…

Reviewer: ```suggestion
related to the "root cause" of layout instability. Here are a few examples.
```

  alt="Example showing a layout shift caused by a change in element dimensions",
  width="800",
  height="452"
 %}

**Example #2**

The layout shift in this example would be reported with two sources: element A
and element B. The root cause of this layout shift is the change in position of
element A.

{% Img
  src="image/j2RDdG43oidUy6AL6LovThjeX9c2/AhaslIEWb5fFMMgiZcI2.png",
  alt="Example showing a layout shift caused by a change in element position",
  width="800",
  height="451"
 %}

**Example #3**

The layout shift in this example would be reported with one source: element B.
Changing the position of element B resulted in this layout shift.

{% Img
  src="image/j2RDdG43oidUy6AL6LovThjeX9c2/6zKjd4Ua6YJ94LMlqiMR.png",
  alt="Example showing a layout shift caused by a change in element position",
  width="800",
  height="451"
 %}

**Example #4**

Although element B changes size, there is no layout shift in this example.

{% Img
  src="image/j2RDdG43oidUy6AL6LovThjeX9c2/ZujHWxsXI3C7tupe42oD.png",
  alt="Example showing a element changing size but not causing a layout shift",
  width="800",
  height="446"
 %}

> For a demo of how DOM changes are reported by the Layout Instability API, check
> out this [Glitch](https://desert-righteous-router.glitch.me/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check out a [demo of how DOM changes are reported by the Layout Instability API](https://desert-righteous-router.glitch.me/).
```

### DevTools

> #### Performance Panel

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Performance panel
```

The **Experience** pane of the DevTools **Performance** panel displays all
layout shifts that occur during a given performance trace—even if they occur

> within 500ms of a user interaction and therefore don't count towards CLS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
within 500&nbsp;ms of a user interaction and therefore don't count towards CLS.
```

Hovering over a particular layout shift in the **Experience** panel highlights
the affected DOM element.

{% Img
  src="image/j2RDdG43oidUy6AL6LovThjeX9c2/Uug2fnJT8mOc2YQmxo2l.png",
  alt="Screenshot of a layout shift displayed in the DevTools Network panel",

>   width="724",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  class="w-screenshot",
  width="724",
```

  height="629"
 %}

To view more information about the layout shift, click on the layout shift, then
open the **Summary** drawer. Changes to the element's dimensions are listed
using the format `[width, height]`; changes to the element's position are listed
using the format `[x,y]`. The **Had recent input** property indicates whether a

> layout shift occurred within 500ms of a user interaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
layout shift occurred within 500&nbsp;ms of a user interaction.
```

> {% Img
>   src="image/j2RDdG43oidUy6AL6LovThjeX9c2/AfVjsH9Nl9w0lJwQZEjR.png",
>   alt="Screenshot of the DevTools 'Summary' tab for a layout shift",
>   width="612",
>   height="354"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Img
  src="image/j2RDdG43oidUy6AL6LovThjeX9c2/AfVjsH9Nl9w0lJwQZEjR.png",
  alt="Screenshot of the DevTools 'Summary' tab for a layout shift",
  class="w-screenshot",
  width="612",
  height="354"
```

 %}

For information on the duration of a layout shift, open the **Event Log** tab.
The duration of a layout shift can also be approximated by looking in the
**Experience** pane for the length of the red layout shift rectangle.

{% Img
  src="image/j2RDdG43oidUy6AL6LovThjeX9c2/124Dm7vV3EGM7M9fiugs.png",
  alt="Screenshot of the DevTools 'Event Log' tab for a layout shift",

>   width="612",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  class="w-screenshot",
  width="612",
```

  height="354"
 %}

{% Aside %}
The duration of a layout shift has no impact on its layout shift score.
{% endAside %}

> For more information on using the Performance Panel, refer to [Performance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on using the **Performance** panel, refer to [Performance
```

Analysis
Reference](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/evaluate-performance/reference).

#### Highlight layout shift regions

Highlighting layout shift regions can be a helpful technique for getting a
quick, at-a-glance feel for the location and timing of the layout shifts
occurring on a page.

To enable Layout Shift Regions in DevTools, go to **Settings > More Tools >
Rendering > Layout Shift Regions** then refresh the page that you wish to debug.
Areas of layout shift will be briefly highlighted in purple.

> ## Thought Process

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Thought process for identifying the cause of layout shifts
```

The steps listed below can be used to identify the cause of layout shifts
regardless of when or how the layout shift occurs. These steps can be
supplemented with running Lighthouse—however, keep in mind that Lighthouse can
only identify layout shifts that occurred during the initial page load. In
addition, Lighthouse also can only provide suggestions for some causes of layout

> shifts—for example, image elements do not have explicit width and height.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
shifts—for example, image elements that do not have explicit width and height.
```

### Identifying the cause of a layout shift

Layout shifts can be caused by the following events:

*   Changes to the position of a DOM element
*   Changes to the dimensions of a DOM element
*   Insertion or removal of a DOM element
*   Animations that trigger layout

In particular, the DOM element immediately preceding the shifted element is the
element most likely to be involved in "causing" layout shift. Thus, when
investigating why a layout shift occurred consider:

*   Did the position or dimensions of the preceding element change?
*   Was a DOM element inserted or removed before the shifted element?
*   Was the position of the shifted element explicitly changed?

If the preceding element did not cause the layout shift, continue your search by
considering other preceding and nearby elements.

In addition, the direction and distance of a layout shift can provide hints
about root cause. For example, a large downward shift often indicates the

> insertion of a DOM element, whereas a 1px or 2px layout shift often indicates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
insertion of a DOM element, whereas a 1&nbsp;px or 2&nbsp;px layout shift often indicates
```

the application of conflicting CSS styles or the loading and application of a
web font.

<figure class="w-figure">
  {% Img
    src="image/j2RDdG43oidUy6AL6LovThjeX9c2/g0892nhvz3SnSaasaO1b.png",
    alt="Diagram showing a layout shift caused by a font swap",
    width="800",
    height="452"
  %}
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    In this example, font swapping caused page elements to shift upwards by five pixels.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

These are some of the specific behaviors that most frequently cause layout shift
events:

#### Changes to the position of an element (that aren't due to the movement of another element)…

> Are often the result of:

Reviewer: This formatting might sound weird on screen readers as they often announce the heading levels. I'd like to check this before merging (probably tmrw)

*   Insertion of ads and other third-party embeds
*   Insertion of banners, alerts, and modals
*   Infinite scroll and other UX patterns that load additional content above
    existing content

#### Animations that trigger layout

Some animation effects can [trigger
layout](https://gist.github.com/paulirish/5d52fb081b3570c81e3a). A common
example of this is when DOM elements are 'animated' by incrementing properties
like `top` or `left` rather than using CSS's
[`transform`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform)
property. This [article](https://web.dev/animations-guide/) has more information
on creating performant CSS animations.

### Reproducing layout shifts

You can't fix layout shifts that you can't reproduce. One of the simplest, yet
most effective things you can do to get a better sense of your site's layout
stability is take 5-10 minutes to interact with your site with the goal
triggering layout shifts. Keep the console open while doing this and use the
Layout Instability API to report on layout shifts.

For hard to locate layout shifts, consider repeating this exercise with
different devices and connection speeds. In particular, using a slower

> connection speed can make it easier to identify layout shifts. In addition, a
> `debugger` statement can be used to make it easier to step through layout
> shifts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
connection speed can make it easier to identify layout shifts. In addition,
you can use a `debugger` statement to make it easier to step through layout
shifts.
```

```javascript
new PerformanceObserver((entryList) => {
  for (const entry of entryList.getEntries()) {
    if (!entry.hadRecentInput) {
      cls += entry.value;

>       debugger;

Reviewer: Maybe highlight the line with the debugger here.
